+++
title = 'On Seeing Ghosts'
date = 2023-12-07T14:03:21-05:00
+++

When I stay up too late---say, past two in the morning---I tend to have auditory hallucinations. Sometimes I hear muffled conversation that stops abruptly when I get out of bed to investigate. Other times I hear music coming up through the floor. Occasionally I hear a voice harshly whisper my name from right behind my head. These are pretty benign as far as hallucinations go, and I usually just ignore them.

One night, I also experienced some visual hallucinations. It was a summer during undergrad when I had nothing to do, and I had let my sleep schedule drift really far from normal; I was going to bed at 5 a.m. and waking up around noon. That night, I saw dark shapes crawling up the walls in my peripheral vision. I decided to go to bed. A few hours later, I was abruptly woken up by what I thought was a man with his face inches from my own, shouting as loudly as he could while pounding his fists into the mattress near my head. I shot upright and realized I was alone. That's when I decided I would never again stay up past 2 a.m., and I’ve stuck to that promise ever since.

Aside from hallucinations, I also occasionally have sleep paralysis. I wake up and realize I can't move, aside from some weak vocalizations and muscle twitches in my arms. I generally find this annoying but not scary, and either continue to twitch until I regain the ability to move, or decide to go back to sleep. I've never had hallucinations during sleep paralysis, but one time a relative of mine saw a stereotypical grey alien slowly walking toward them from the corner of their room during an instance of sleep paralysis. Their response was "Oh, that's neat!" Then they fell back asleep. 

This makes me wonder if most ghost sightings are simply attributable to hallucinations. It would explain why most "supernatural" events happen at night. It would explain why they happen most often when you're alone and tired. It explains why people who claim to have seen or heard a ghost insist that they’re not lying or mistaking a bag for a ghost or whatever---they really did experience it, but they don't realize it was a hallucination.

Hallucinations are [more common than you'd think](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamapsychiatry/fullarticle/2298236), and people who don't know this would probably assume their hallucinations have external causes. "Hallucinations only happen to crazy people, right? I'm not crazy. It was a ghost!" This is a much simpler explanation than some of the other explanations that have been proposed, like the resonances of certain rooms [causing people to feel fear](https://www.theguardian.com/science/2003/oct/16/science.farout) and vibrating their eyeballs in just the right way to cause them to see shadows, or that all the people who claim to have seen or heard ghosts are purposefully lying. &#x2766;
