+++
title = 'On the Origin of the Universe'
date = 2023-12-07T14:13:21-05:00
draft = true
+++


While working on another project, I remembered an argument I came up with a decade ago but never wrote down. It concerns questions like "What created the universe?" and "Why is there something rather than nothing?" I don't think this argument is new---I think Sean Carroll made the same point once, though I can't find where. Anyway, the argument went something like this.


There's a concept in epistemology called [M&uuml;nchhausen's Trilemma](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M%C3%BCnchhausen_trilemma). Think of a proof as a directed graph where the nodes are statements and the arrows are inferences. If we look for the ultimate justification of a statement, one of the following must be true: Either the proof ultimately rests on axioms that we assert without justification, or the proof requires an infinite number of steps, or the proof is circular and relies on the statement we're trying to prove. Since this list exhausts the possibilities, and none of the options are satisfying, it is impossible to ever prove anything in a way humans would find intuitively satisfying. (Personally, I think this just shows that our intuitive concept of "proof" is incoherent and should be relinquished.)

My argument is that the same thing can be applied to causation. Instead of thinking about a graph of statements and inferences, we can think about a graph of events and causes. When looking for the ultimate cause of an event, then, one of the following must be true: Either the event was ultimately caused by a past event that has no cause itself, or the event was caused by a series of events stretching infinitely back into the past with no beginning, or the event is involved in a stable time loop and somehow caused itself. This, too, is an exhaustive list.

Therefore, the answer to the question "Why is there something instead of nothing?" will *a priori* never have a satisfactory answer. Perhaps we will realize that it's impossible to gain information about anything outside the universe even in principle (I think this is true by definition). Or perhaps we will discover that the universe was created by something else, like a god or another universe. All that does is push the question up one level: What caused that? Or maybe we will find that the universe created itself, or that we're one of two universes that created each other, or something. All that does is bring up the question of the origin of the meta-universe in which this process is allowed to occur!

We will never have an answer that isn't one of these three options, and yet people spend a lot of time and effort trying to console themselves that "No, actually, I do have an intuitively satisfying answer!" Hypothesizing creator gods, other universes, unmoved movers, etc. does not help you escape the trilemma. A [Level IV Tegmark Universe](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiverse#Max_Tegmark's_four_levels) doesn't help because it just pushes the question up to why *that* exists.

(The *worst* kind of theorizing about the origins of the universe is the kind exemplified in Lawrence Krauss's [*A Universe from Nothing*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Universe_from_Nothing). He claims that the laws of physics show how our universe can arise from empty, spaceless quantum fields, and that this provides a complete and satisfying answer to the age-old question. But it doesn't! It doesn't explain where that initial quantum field comes from, or the rules that govern its evolution!)

Personally, I don't believe we will ever have any information about any process outside our universe, because this is impossible even in principle. I believe that the people who even think this question is important are making a particular mistake about the nature of causality. Consider a causal diagram for every event in the entire known universe. We can ask what caused a particular event, like "Why is the sidewalk wet?", and, depending on the abstraction level and the categories we decide to chop the universe into, get some causal answer; "Because it rained." "Because the sky god was angry." "Because of the laws of physics and the boundary conditions of the universe."

But the question "Why is there something rather than nothing?" isn‘t really a question that makes sense in this context. You're not asking for the ultimate cause of some event in the causal diagram: You're asking what caused *the causal diagram itself*. This is a category error; a mixing up different levels of abstraction. This is why I don't believe that the question is worth losing sleep over, or even pursuing. We will never know the ultimate cause for our existence, and that's okay, because the question itself is actually incoherent. &#x2766;
